Let's switch gears a bit and dive into
accessibility in JavaScript applications,
something that I have been
very passionate about for
a long time because I feel like there's
a lot to improve in JavaScript-heavy apps.
So let's focus on some
of the unique aspects,
starting with client-side rendering and
client-side routing.
So, when you render your pages
using libraries like React,
Angular, View, Framework of the week,
[LAUGH] often those JavaScript
libraries are taking over rendering and
routing from the browser.
So, replacing one view with another using
JavaScript, and there is no page refresh.
That has implications, especially for
keyboard and screen reader users,
often missed, but
let's talk about what goes into that.
Sometimes these apps are doing what's
called hydration, where you have
content that's pre-rendered on the server,
and then there's client side code.
Sometimes it's a duplication.
Don't love that.
But you go from this pre rendered server
code, the JavaScript downloads executes,
and then they hydrate the pages
into interactive versions.
And so that's pretty popular.
Gatsby did that, Next does it,
Spelte, among others.
You can configure a lot of your libraries
and frameworks to render on the server,
which is great.
It's super cool.
At least with things like Astro,
they give you the option.
Really, obviously, it's pretty cool.
It's gotten easier for
sure to pre render on the server.
So this question comes up,
do people turn JavaScript off?
It's kind of the elephant in the room,
we're talking about rendering on
the server, talking about a lot
of clients like JavaScript,
there's been a debate over that for
a long time.
And most of the internet requires it now.
I don't know if you've
turned off JavaScript and
tried to navigate the web recently,
but it would be hard.
[LAUGH] You're gonna
have a bad time probably.
And so it is easier to render web
apps on the server now than it was
a few years ago.
But we've come to know and expect and
users have come to know and
expect a certain level
of modern interactivity.
Anyone that uses Facebook would be
upset if it refreshed every time they
hit the light button, like that
asynchronous posting to a server,
updating, I mean,
we expect things to be fast and async, so
not too many people
are turning JavaScript off.
For accessibility, it is not strictly
a requirement that you support node.js.
In fact, JavaScript is necessary for
stateful ARIA.
If you have any ARIA states
that you're turning on and off,
you have to toggle those with
JavaScript and even keyboard events.
I mean, sure,
you could do a lot with forms, but
that's not gonna get to the type
of experience that we expect now.
So JavaScript is not a bad thing.
I love JavaScript.
It's powerful, it's in every browser.
I mean, it's everywhere, right?
We can do a lot.
It's gotten really good, too.
A lot of the features
we have now are great.
So, for accessibility,
JavaScript can be helpful.
It also can be the source of
a lot of inaccessible apps.
So, let's talk about the accessibility
impacts of JavaScript.
So screen readers do look
at a page as rendered.
So however the page is constructed,
whether it's hydrated from the server and
then turned into client side code,
or if it's totally rendered all in
the client with JavaScript, screen readers
are going to look at what has been
rendered at the end of that process,
so it's fine to use JavaScript.
You do need to consider
lower bandwidth networks and
people with older devices, but that's
not strictly an accessibility issue,
it's more usability performance,
like those topics start to come up.
But this is where accessibility and
Performance tend to intersect.
So with client-side routing, that is
when we take the functionality of page
refreshes away from the browser and we let
JavaScript replace those views instead.
So we're replacing one with another.
And this has those impacts, as I said, on
keyboard users because when you click on
something without doing anything about it,
and a JavaScript library or a routing
library, your focus is just gonna stay
there, cuz the page didn't refresh.
So for a keyboard user, they might be
left there going, did anything happen?
I clicked that,
I didn't hear anything, and
maybe it changed the view,
if I could see it.
But I'm still left on that link, just kind
of functionally, that's what happens.
And so for a screen reader user, they
might have no idea that the page changed.
They're clicking, okay, I clicked
this link, nothing happened, I didn't
hear anything, I have no idea, I'm still
on this link, I think it might be broken.
That's kind of a problem, isn't it?
So we need to handle that.
And there are some techniques.
And I had heard many techniques over
the years, including, okay, I'm on this
nav link, I hit Enter, I send focus
to a heading in the new content area.
Okay, that could work, for a screen reader
user, That would announce that content.
It would move me in the new content so
I would know something happened.
And screen reader users
have been happy with that.
It's worked fine.
If you add tab index of
negative one on that heading,
you can make sure you catch it
with that programmatic focus.
He used JavaScript to actually
call focus on that element.
Another technique, very similar is
when you're on that nav link and
you hit Enter, you send focus to
a wrapper element instead of a heading.
It's pretty similar except it's gonna
announce more than just the heading.
So both of those have been recommended.
There's other techniques
that I've seen in the wild.
So another technique could be maybe you
leave focus Where it was on the nav link,
but there's an ARIA live
region on the new content.
And when it changes,
it'll automatically announce it.
It kind of like our slide show,
when that content changed,
it was automatically getting announced.
I've seen that on sites.
You could potentially leave focus where
it is and have a separate live region.
That's just hidden from view, but
it's still rendered and it just says, hey,
page change to portfolio page or
whatever the new pages.
So these are all techniques and
they're all floating around.
I thought, I really wish I had more
information on what to recommend.
So when I worked at Gatsby, I did some
testing with a group called Fable in
Toronto, they have a community of
disabled testers that you can work with.
They're amazing.
And they'll test prototypes,
pages, product demos,
whatever you put in front of them,
and they will test it with a variety
of screen readers and voice navigation and
magnification in Zoom.
So they can really catch you on some
biases, which is what happened for me.
I was like, cool.
I know the screen reader
techniques work great.
I was not thinking about low
vision like magnification in Zoom.
And I was not thinking
about voice navigation.
So it was really helpful for
me to bring in these prototypes and
get other perspectives that I was not
considering, and it ended up really
affecting my advice, which was kind of
a combination of all of these techniques.
So what I ended up landing on was
move focus into the new content, so
from the nav link you clicked on,
move it into the new page somewhere.
And I actually found moving
it to something focusable and
operable like a button,
like a skip link maybe,
something that's like
a heading is not interactive.
So I've learned maybe that would be
more helpful, and then separately
make a live region announcement so
that the page change is announced.
And so there's a whole research study,
if you're curious,
you can go read about it
on the Getsby.js site.
That's where I worked
when I did this research.
This has been referenced in almost
all of the JavaScript frameworks.
So I've seen it in Svelte.
I've seen View talk about it.
I mean React, it's funny though,
they don't at me on GitHub, but
I'll see the link pops up, hey,
cool, they're referencing this
in JavaScript libraries, so
you might see it pop up a little bit.
And that's neat because
if people are hungry for
this type of research and
it was so awesome to do.
That I think even aside from
what the findings were for
client-side routing, we could let it
be an example of how you can engage
with user testing with a group like Fable,
cuz that was super cool.
And if you wanna look at a demo,
I do have one in the slides,
a little routing demo of like,
I guess we could look at it real quick.
Let's see what I mean
by client-side routing.
So in this example, I have two routes.
I click them, and my focus, I can move
from the link to the main content area.
And that's basically what I'm saying,
whether you leave the focus
where it was over here on the left,
or do you move it to the new content.
And so this uses a random third
party router that I found,
but there's plenty of routing libraries.
Look for ones that give you hooks so
that you can actually say
where the focus should go.
Cuz some of the challenges with
libraries trying to solve that for
us is that it's really hard to
get it right for every use case.
Like when you send focus,
it can mess with scrolling.
Sometimes it can mess
with browser history.
And so like React Router and Remix,
they've been trying to find a solution for
years and haven't quite landed on one.
I think the pros I promise that we're
hoping that the navigation API in Chrome
will handle it at the browser level.
But in the meantime, look for
routers that will allow you to
move focus to the right place or
just use multi -page sites.
So, real talk real quick.
I did all this research.
I love Javascript.
I'm not a huge fan of client side routing,
I have to be honest with you, and
it's because a lot of the solutions
are kind of half baked and
we end up just marginalizing, that
screen reader experience of being like,
I don't know what happened.
It's like hasn't been quite
important enough to solve and
it's hard to get it right.
We've done all the experimentations
of trying to move focus to the main
content area for everyone that uses
a router and people disable it.
It doesn't work.
So find a solution that works for
you, client-side routing can be cool.
You can actually be more, you can dictate
more of where focus should go because
you're crafting it, but we can't
exactly mimic full page refreshes.
That's when the browser refreshes and
the screen reader really like,
you can configure those to
read the whole page summary.
We just can't replace that
functionality with client-side routing.
So if you're choosing how to architect
your site, at least put in your decision
criteria about whether you
could get away with multi-page.
You can have that page have
a lot of client rendering on it,
but maybe you don't have a router.
That's what the site I work on does.
And it's kind of refreshing,
I'll be honest.
A lot less concerns.
But we can always change that,
we have client side routing.
So these are the techniques
you could look for, look at.
And I think at the bare minimum,
this first one of sending focus to
the main heading and the new content,
it wasn't the one I ended up recommending
at the end of the research story, but
I think it's it's better than
just leaving Focus where it was.
So you have some options.
Any questions on client side routing?
>> I have one.
I was scanning the article that you
linked, that you wrote for Gatsby,
and there's a sentence here
that I'm curious about.
It says, a back button would
help to use browser history, and
it was a limitation of the prototype.
So does that mean that,
because assistive technologies don't
have hooks into the native browser,
routing forward backward buttons,
is that something that you'd lose out on?
>> I think you can hook into browser
DOM APIs like the the navigator API.
I'm pretty sure you can.
>> Is that considered a dark pattern
cuz I use that a lot myself but
is that less accessible, inherently,
if you're using these technologies?
>> Not necessarily.
I think, yeah, as I've read about,
l seeing what the Remix team and
React Router team is the same people.
But seeing what they've tried,
I've seen some comments about it,
some things messing with history.
I think you just have to test solutions,
make sure they still work.
But a lot of those
DOM APIs should work fine.
I think it's more like
where you move focus and
how the page change is announced,
how is that communicated?
Those are the things that
kind of just get skipped.
So I think those are the concerns
that we have to look at and
then try to keep browser history working.
I've seen so many client routed sites that
just don't even hook into browser history.
It's like we gave up that feature, but
I think you could add support back in.
[LAUGH] But you could see this is like,
you end up having to replace
the stuff that you took away.